---
layout: post
title: "Lessons I Learnt in Twenty Fourteen"
---

Twenty fourteen was a roller-coaster ride with many ups and downs. I decided to write down some of the key lessons that I've learnt this year. They are in random order (refresh for proof). I will be updating this soon.

- **On passion and craft.** Though “follow your passion” sounds romantic, proceeds it is the mastery of rare and valuable skills, to back your passion up. Don't forget to *dream big*, though.

- **On learning.** One of the most important things you learn in school is how to learn.

- **On reading.** The best way to expand your knowledge on various topics is to read widely.

- **On mortality.** Remember you will die someday; and so will the people you love. Be thankful that you are alive. Your days have a limited capacity, so make the most out of every day you have left. Don't miss opportunities to tell people what they mean to you. Cherish every moment.

- **On time management.** Time is your most valuable resource. You can't get back time, so don't waste it. Focus on on tasks that have long-term importance rather than short-term urgency.

- **On optimism.** Optimism creates resilience. Have a pragmatic and positive outlook on life.

- **On simplicity.** Make a conscious effort to simplify your life and keep back only the things that matter. Eliminate commitments, block distractions, and purge possessions.

- **On influence.** You are the average of the people you spend time with, so choose wisely. You are a reflection of your environment, so choose your inputs wisely. With a smart group of people you will be challenged to grow.

- **On mastery.** The best way to achieve mastery of your craft is by doing it often and learning from your mistakes.

- **On doubt.** Doubt reasonably. Refuse to bow blindly to conventional prejudices and question all of your first principles. Don't fool yourself, either.

- **On perfection.** You will never reach perfection. Don't waste time trying to achieve it.

- **On happiness.** Success doesn't lead to happiness. Don't think that you need to achieve a certain level of achievement to be happy. That level will only increase as you achieve more.

- **On stability.** Sometimes life doesn't treat you well. That's okay. Get back up.

- **On meditation.** Meditate daily. Even a 10 minute meditation session can help you focus better and reduce stress and anxiety.

- **On scheduling.** Follow your schedule and follow it religiously. This discipline will help you be more focused and motivated.

- **On leaving your comfort zone.** Leave your comfort zone. It's only when you leave your comfort zone that learning happens. Try new things that will help you grow. Don't allow a lack of confidence to hold you back from pursuing great opportunities. Don't fear fear.


<script type="text/javascript">
  var list_items = document.getElementsByTagName('ul')[0];
  var count = list_items.getElementsByTagName('li').length;
  var array = [];
  for(var i = 0; i < count; i++) {
    array.push(list_items.getElementsByTagName('li')[i]);
  }
  var shuffled_list = shuffle(array);
  for(var i = 0; i < count; i++) {
    list_items.appendChild(shuffled_list[i]);
  }
</script>
