---
layout: post
title: "How I Focus"
subtitle: "Personal tips for uninterrupted periods of productivity"
tags: ['productivity']
---

- **Plan:** I put everything I need to do on my to-do list (I use [Wunderlist](https://www.wunderlist.com/)), and complete them one after another. Set reasonable time expectations. Having a pre-set routine also helps.
- **Monotask**: Multitasking is a myth. What is perceived as multitasking is actually *inefficient task-switching*. Each task requires a specific mindset, and switching between the two tasks takes time. I focus on one task, and I don't move onto another till I finish the first.
- **DND mode**: My phone is on always on Do Not Disturb mode. This allows me to check notifications at my own time, and eliminate the ability of my phone to take my attention without my permission. Even better: set specific times for checking your notifications (I check them at 10 AM and 9 PM).
- **Internet distractions**: If you don't need your laptop for the task at hand, close it. If you need your laptop but not internet, turn your internet off. If you need internet, close all unnecessary tabs. [StayFocusd](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/stayfocusd/laankejkbhbdhmipfmgcngdelahlfoji?hl=en) and [SelfControl](https://selfcontrolapp.com/) are great tools to eliminate internet distractions. If you have trouble with social media, re-evaluate its value to you.
- **Breaks**: I take a break every hour or so, and get back feeling refreshed. Stretch, meditate, drink water, take a walk, etc. It helps clear your head.
- **Declutter**: My working environment needs to be clean for me to focus. I maintain the habit of decluttering on a daily basis. Anything that is not needed for the task at hand from your workspace can be removed or kept away
